Chapter 4 (#4)
Andarist/total-typescript-book: book-content/chapters/04-essential-types-and-annotations.md

Now we've covered most of the why of TypeScript, it's time to start with the how. We'll cover key concepts like type annotations and type inference, as well as how to start writing type-safe functions.

It's important to build a solid foundation, as everything you'll learn later builds upon what you'll learn in this chapter.

## Basic Annotations

One of the most common things you'll need to do as a TypeScript developer is to annotate your code. Annotations tell TypeScript what type something is supposed to be.

Annotations will often use a `:` - this is used to tell TypeScript that a variable or function parameter is of a certain type.

### Function Parameter Annotations

One of the most important annotations you'll use is for function parameters.

For example, here is a `logAlbumInfo` function that takes in a `title` string, a `trackCount` number, and an `isReleased` boolean:

```ts twoslash

> const logAlbumInfo = (

Author: using function declaration for this example (and the following ones) could be more readable for some

It behaves as if we'd annotated it, warning us if we try to assign it a different type from what it was assigned originally:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322

let isReleased = true;

isReleased = "yes";
```

And also giving us autocomplete on the variable:

```ts
albumTitle.toUpper; // shows `toUpperCase` in autocomplete
```

This is an extremely powerful part of TypeScript. It means that you can mostly _not_ annotate variables and still have your IDE know what type things are.

#### Function Parameters Always Need Annotations

But type inference can't work everywhere. Let's see what happens if we remove the type annotations from the `logAlbumInfo` function's parameters:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 7006
const logAlbumInfo = (
  title,

  trackCount,

  isReleased,
) => {
  // rest of function body
};
```

On its own, TypeScript isn't able to infer the types of the parameters, so it shows an error under each parameter name.

This is because functions are very different to variables. TypeScript can see what value is assigned to which variable, so it can make a good guess about the type.

> But TypeScript can't tell from a function parameter alone what type it's supposed to be. When you don't annotate it, it defaults the type to `any` - a scary, unsafe type.

Author: *unless it's able to infer parameter types from the contextual type:
```ts
type Fn = (arg: string) => void
const fn: Fn = (arg) => {} // yay, no parameter annotation and the type is there
```

It also can't detect it from usage. If we had an 'add' function that took two parameters, TypeScript wouldn't be able to tell that they were supposed to be numbers:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 7006
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}
```

`a` and `b` could be strings, booleans, or anything else. TypeScript can't know from the function body what type they're supposed to be.

> So, when you're declaring a named function, their parameters always need annotations in TypeScript.

Author: It's probably not worth complicating it here, at this stage... but the sentence doesn't hold up to be true at all times. I could use a named function in the example I gave [here](https://github.com/Andarist/total-typescript-book/pull/4/files#r1667769572) and I could still skip annotating parameters 😉

export let example5: string = 123n;
```

Note that the colon `:` is used to annotate the type of each variable, just like it was for typing the function parameters.

You'll also notice there are several errors.

Hovering over each of the underlined variables will display any associated error messages.

For example, hovering over `example2` will show:

```
Type 'number' is not assignable to type 'string'.
```

The type error for `example3` tells us:

```
Type 'boolean' is not assignable to type 'string'.
```

Change the types of the annotations on each variable to make the errors go away.

<Exercise title="Exercise 3: The Basic Types" filePath="/src/015-essential-types-and-annotations/022-all-types.problem.ts" resourceId="NMpTvrI4rUCyVa4GVzY1iN"></Exercise>

#### Exercise 4: The `any` Type

Here is a function called `handleFormData` that accepts an `e` typed as `any`. The function prevents the default form submission behavior, then creates an object from the form data and returns it:

```ts
const handleFormData = (e: any) => {
  e.preventDefault();

  const data = new FormData(e.terget);

  const value = Object.fromEntries(data.entries());

  return value;
};
```

> Here is a test for the function that creates a form, sets the `innerHTML` to add an input, and then manually submits the form. When it submits, we expect the value to equal the value that was in our form that we grafted in there:

Author: grafted - TIL

```ts
it("Should handle a form submit", () => {
  const form = document.createElement("form");

  form.innerHTML = `
<input name="name" value="John Doe"></Exercise>
`;

  form.onsubmit = (e) => {
    const value = handleFormData(e);

    expect(value).toEqual({ name: "John Doe" });
  };

  form.requestSubmit();

  expect.assertions(1);
});
```

Note that this isn't the normal way you would test a form, but it provides a way to test the example `handleFormData` function more extensively.

In the code's current state, there are no red squiggly lines present.

> However, when running the test with Vitest we get an error similar to the following:

Author: U have included Vitest in the package.json deps in the Chapter 1 but other than that it's the first time it's mentioned and it might not be obvious how to run it etc.

Using `any` also disables useful features like autocompletion, which can help you avoid typos.

That's right-- the error in the above code was caused by a typo of `e.terget` instead of `e.target` when creating the `FormData`!

```ts
const handleFormData = (e: any) => {
  e.preventDefault();

  const data = new FormData(e.terget); // e.terget! Whoops!

  const value = Object.fromEntries(data.entries());

  return value;
};
```

If `e` had been properly typed, this error would have been caught by TypeScript right away. We'll come back to this example in the future to see the proper typing.

Using `any` may seem like a quick fix when you have trouble figuring out how to properly type something, but it can come back to bite you later.

## Object Literal Types

Now that we've done some exploration with basic types, let's move on to object types.

Object types are used to describe the shape of objects. Each property of an object can have its own type annotation.

When defining an object type, we use curly braces to contain the properties and their types:

```ts twoslash
const talkToAnimal = (animal: { name: string; type: string; age: number }) => {
  // rest of function body
};

> ```

Author: it kinda feels weird for a basic example for object types to be depicted using a function's parameter. I think a type alias would really be more suitable here. Or at least maybe a similar inline annotation on a variable or smth

#### Solution 1: Object Literal Types

In order to annotate the `user` parameter as an object, we can use the curly brace syntax `{}`.

Let's start by annotating the `user` parameter as an empty object:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2339
const concatName = (user: {}) => {
  return `${user.first} ${user.last}`;
};
```

The errors change. This is progress, of a kind. The errors now show up under `.first` and `.last` in the function return.

In order to fix these errors, we need to add the `first` and `last` properties to the type annotation.

```ts twoslash
const concatName = (user: { first: string; last: string }) => {
  return `${user.first} ${user.last}`;
};
```

Now TypeScript knows that both the `first` and `last` properties of `user` are strings, and the test passes.

#### Solution 2: Optional Property Types

Similar to when we set a function parameter as optional, we can use the `?` to specify that an object's property is optional.

As seen in a previous exercise, we can add a question mark to function parameters to make them optional:

```ts twoslash
function concatName(user: { first: string; last?: string }) {
  // implementation
}
```

> Adding `?:` indicates to TypeScript that the property doesn't need to be present.

Author: ```suggestion
Adding `?:` indicates to TypeScript that the property can be undefined.
```

};

processRecipe({
  title: "Chocolate Chip Cookies",
  ingredients: [
    { name: "Flour", quantity: "2 cups" },
    { name: "Sugar", quantity: "1 cup" },
  ],
  instructions: "...",
});
```

The function is called with an object containing `title`, `instructions`, and `ingredients` properties, but there are currently errors because the `Recipe` type doesn't currently have an `ingredients` property:

```
Argument of type '{title: string; ingredients: { name: string; quantity: string; }[]; instructions: string; }' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Recipe'.

Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'ingredients' does not exist in type 'Recipe'.
```

By combining what you've seen with typing object properties and working with arrays, how would you specify ingredients for the `Recipe` type?

<Exercise title="Exercise 2: Arrays of Objects" filePath="/src/015-essential-types-and-annotations/029-arrays-of-objects.problem.ts" resourceId="YgFRxBViy44CfW0H2dToDx"></Exercise>

#### Exercise 3: Tuples

Here we have a `setRange` function that takes in an array of numbers:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2344
import { Expect, Equal } from "@total-typescript/helpers";

> // @noUncheckedIndexedAccess: true

Author: You didnt include this flag up until now anywhere so it feels weird that this example is using it. Depending on how people will copy-paste this code and stuff they might not reach the same errors etc as u do with this flag

```

But unfortunately, we can't. We get an error saying that `.getElementById` expects zero type arguments.

We can see whether a function can receive type arguments by hovering over it. Let's try hovering `.getElementById`:

```ts
// hovering over .getElementById shows:
(method) Document.getElementById(elementId: string): HTMLElement | null
```

Notice that `.getElementById` contains no angle brackets (`<>`) in its hover, which is why we can't pass a type to it.

Let's contrast it with a function that _can_ receive type arguments, like `document.querySelector`:

```ts
const audioElement = document.querySelector("#player");

// hovering over .querySelector shows:
(method) ParentNode.querySelector<Element>(selectors: string): Element | null
```

This type definition shows us that `.querySelector` has some angle brackets before the parentheses. Inside of the brackets is the default value inside them - in this case, `Element`.

So, to fix our code above we could replace `.getElementById` with `.querySelector` and use the `#player` selector to find the audio element:

```ts
const audioElement = document.querySelector<HTMLAudioElement>("#player");
```

> And everything works.

Author: it could be helpful to mention here that this doesn't truly provide type-safety, we just convince TS to trust us on this one

#### Solution 1: Passing Types to Map

There are a few different ways to solve this problem, but we'll start with the most straightforward one.

The first thing to do is to create a `User` type:

```ts
type User = {
  name: string;
  age: number;
};
```

Following the patterns we've seen so far, we can pass `number` and `User` as the types for the `Map`:

```ts
const userMap = new Map<number, User>();
```

That's right - some functions can receive _multiple_ type arguments. In this case, the `Map` constructor can receive two types: one for the key, and one for the value.

With this change, the errors go away, and we can no longer pass in incorrect types into the `userMap.set` function.

You can also express the `User` type inline:

```ts
const userMap = new Map<number, { name: string; age: number }>();
```

#### Solution 2: `JSON.parse()` Can't Receive Type Arguments

Let's look a bit closer at the error message we get when passing a type argument to `JSON.parse`:

```
Expected 0 type arguments, but got 1.
```

> This message indicates that TypeScript is not expecting anything inside the angle braces when calling `JSON.parse`. To resolve this error, we can remove the angle braces:

Author: ```suggestion
This message indicates that TypeScript is not expecting anything inside the angle braces when calling `JSON.parse`. To resolve this error, we can remove the angle brackets:
```

```ts
logAlbumInfo("Midnights", 13, true, "2022-10-21");

logAlbumInfo("American Beauty", 10, true);
```

Hovering over the optional `releaseDate` parameter in VS Code will show us that it is now typed as `string | undefined`.

We'll discuss the `|` symbol more later, but this means that the parameter could either be a `string` or `undefined`. It would be acceptable to literally pass `undefined` as a second argument, or it can be omitted all together.

### Default Parameters

In addition to marking parameters as optional, you can set default values for parameters by using the `=` operator.

For example, we could set the `format` to default to `"CD"` if no format is provided:

```ts
const logAlbumInfo = (
  title: string,
  trackCount: number,
  isReleased: boolean,
  format: string = "CD",
) => {
  // rest of function body
};
```

The annotation of `: string` can also be omitted:

```ts
const logAlbumInfo = (
  title: string,
  trackCount: number,
  isReleased: boolean,
  format = "CD",
) => {
  // rest of function body
};
```

Since it can infer the type of the `format` parameter from the value provided. This is another nice example of type inference.

### Function Return Types

> In addition to setting parameter types, we can also set the return type of a function.

Author: nit:
```suggestion
In addition to annotating parameter types, we can also annotate the return type of a function.
```

both probably are fine though

```ts
const logAlbumInfo = (
  title: string,
  trackCount: number,
  isReleased: boolean,
): string => {
  // rest of function body
};
```

If the value returned from a function doesn't match the type that was specified, TypeScript will show an error.

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2322
const logAlbumInfo = (
  title: string,
  trackCount: number,
  isReleased: boolean,
): string => {
  return 123;
};
```

Return types are useful for when you want to ensure that a function returns a specific type of value.

### Rest Parameters

Just like in JavaScript, TypeScript supports rest parameters by using the `...` syntax for the final parameter. This allows you to pass in any number of arguments to a function.

For example, this `printAlbumFormats` is set up to accept an `album` and any number of `formats`:

```ts
function getAlbumFormats(album: Album, ...formats: string[]) {
  return `${album.title} is available in the following formats: ${formats.join(
    ", ",
  )}`;
}
```

> Declaring the parameter with the `...formats` syntax combined with an array of strings lets us pass in any number of strings to the function:

Author: might be worth mentioning somewhere nearby that "any" here means between 0 and infinity

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 7006
type User = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
};

const modifyUser = (user: User[], id: string, makeChange) => {
  return user.map((u) => {
    if (u.id === id) {
      return makeChange(u);
    }

    return u;
  });
};
```

Currently there is an error under `makeChange`.

Here's an example of how this function would be called:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 7006
type User = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
};

const modifyUser = (user: User[], id: string, makeChange) => {
  return user.map((u) => {
    if (u.id === id) {
      return makeChange(u);
    }

    return u;
  });
};

// ---cut---
const users: User[] = [
  { id: "1", name: "John" },
  { id: "2", name: "Jane" },
];

modifyUser(users, "1", (user) => {
  return { ...user, name: "Waqas" };
});
```

In the above example, the `user` parameter to the error function also has the "implicit `any`" error.

The `modifyUser` type annotation for the `makeChange` function to be updated. It should return a modified user. For example, we should not be able to return a `name` of `123`, because in the `User` type, `name` is a `string`:

```ts
modifyUser(
  users,
  "1",

>   // @ts-expect-error

Author: shouldn't this snippet use one of ur fancy `// @errors` annotations instead?

So if you really don't care about the result of a function, you should type it as `() => void`.

#### Solution 7: Typing Async Functions

You might be tempted to try passing a type argument to `fetch`, similar to how you would with `Map` or `Set`.

However, hovering over `fetch`, we can see that it doesn't accept type arguments:

```ts
// @noErrors
const response = fetch<number>("https://api.example.com/data");
//               ^?
```

We also can't add a type annotation to `response.json()` because as it doesn't accept type arguments either:

```ts twoslash
// @errors: 2558
const response = await fetch("https://api.example.com/data");

// ---cut---
const data: number = await response.json<number>();
```

One thing that will work is to specify that `data` is a `number`:

```ts
const response = await fetch("https://api.example.com/data");

// ---cut---
const data: number = await response.json();
```

This works because `data` was `any` before, and `await response.json()` returns `any`. So now we're putting `any` into a slot that requires a `number`.

> However, the best way to solve this problem is to add a return type to the function. In this case, it should be a `number`:

Author: why would it be the best way? arguably i'd say that it's better to annotate the variable (and return type optionally if that's ur thing). By annotating the variable u benefit from the annotation on the lines between ur `.json()` and the return statement.
